Martin Luther King, Jr. 8.7 ,---,African Civil Rights leader who led movements for equality in America. He fought for people of different races to have equality in the US.

LO 5: The discrimination had been challenged by mlk by leading the civil rights movement.;Nelson Mandela 8.7 ,---,South African who fought for equality and against white domination in South Africa and first African to get elected democratically.

LO5: he challenged the discrimination in south africa by leading and help advance equality.;New modes of communication 9.1 ,---,There are new communication like phones that can allow people to communicate long distances. There are also new technology like trains which help travel at faster pace.

LO1:
This new technology changed the world by allowing communication through long idstances;Green Revolution 9.1 ,---,Due to better irrigation, technology for agriculture, fertilizer, and genetic modified crops, there was a huge increase in agriculture output.

LO1: This technology allowed people around the world to get more food and increase populations.;Medical Innovations (include vaccines and antibiotics) 9.1 ,---,There were new vaccines and antibiotics and other medical breakthroughs that. This caused longer life expectancies and better health care.
LO1: this technology allowed people to live much longer lives and fight diseases.;Covid-19 Pandemic 9.2 ,---,A virus the started in China and spread across the world because it is easy to spread. This caused the shut down of businesses world wide and stock market crash.

LO1: The vaccines were developed for this virus which helped businesses continue on.;Diseases of poverty 9.2 ,---,Diseases in low wealth communities because lack of medical stuff and poor conditions.

LO1: because of lack of technology in low income areas, diseases are more likely due to poor living conditions;Diseases of longevity 9.2 ,---,Diseases that are more common in people who live longer.

LO1: because of advance technology that allowed people to live this long, they are more immune to more diseases;Causes of environmental change 9.3 ,---,Industrial Revolution deforestation, and etc caused pollution and environmental damage. The air quality became bad and there was a great deal of environmental destruction.

LO2: there was an increase in pollution damaging the air and destroying ecosystems.;Economic Liberalization 9.4 ,---,This limits the power of the state in private areas that are owned by people and not the state.

LO4: this changed the economy because businesses could run by a private owner not government.;Deng Xiaoping 9.4 ,---,A communist leader in China who made reforms after the death of Mao Zedong.

LO5: He challenged China's old way's by making reforms to change china;Knowledge Economy 9.4 ,---,A society where the economy depends on how smart the workers are, not the amount of production. For example the economy depends on new technological advancements.

LO4: This change made labour not a huge part about the economy but rather the knowledge of people to make innovations;World Trade Organization (include anti- WTO protests) 9.4/9.7 ,---,An international organization that regulates and sets laws on trade across countries. The purpose is to maintain rules of trade internationally and trade goes as smoothly as possible.

LO4: they changed the global economy by setting rules on world wide trade.;Multinational Corporations 9.4 ,---,An organization that produces goods and sells in different countries. operates in multiple countries.

LO4: these affect the global economy by producing or selling a mass amount of goods internationally.;ASEAN 9.4 ,---,This is an organization for South Asian countries to to grow the economy, against terrorism, etc.

LO4: This changes the economy in multiple nations by helping them in south east asia and help grow it.;UN Declaration of Human Rights 9.5 ,---,This document defined and gave people the basic rights listed in the document. This document was written by the United Nations which allowed people to have a list of rights that they are entitled to.

LO5: they challenged the old ways where people didn't all get rights by giving everyone basic human rights;US Civil Rights Act 1965 9.5 ,---,A social movement to end discrimination in US. This movement was led by Martin Luther King Jr.

LO5: This challenged the older ways of discrimination by attempting to bring equality.;Green Belt Movement 9.5 ,---,An organization in Kenya to replant trees and stop deforestation. This is to help the environment go back to normal.

LO3: they tried to bring changes to the environment be replanting trees because of the effects of deforestation.;Bollywood 9.6 ,---,a film industry in India. This makes movies with Indian languages and majority indian actors.

LO1: the new technology of broadcasting movies to bring entertainment through the country;World Cup Soccer 9.6 ,---,A soccer tournament with countries across the world every 4 years. This brings many states together to celebrate the beautiful game.

LO5: they changed the old way of competition and being enemies with other countries and bring them together to play a sport.;United Nations 9.8 ,---,After WW2, an Organization by countries formed to create peace.

LO5: they challenged the older ways by tying to keep peace internationally because they used to have many wars.;
Non-Aligned Movement 8.2 ,---,Half of the worlds population teamed up to create an organization to prevent being taken over. Developing countries working together to prevent superpowers from taking them over. Belgrade Conference is what started the movement.

LO2: this is an effect of the Cold war because smaller countries couldn't defend themselves from super powers.;Kwame Nkrumah 8.2/8.5 ,---,Helped greatly with Gold Coast's independence movement which helped Ghana's independence.;Proxy Wars (Korean War and Angolan Civil War) 8.3 ,---,There were regional wars where the super powers would fight on the smaller countries to stop the other super power. For example US entered Vietnam to prevent Communist takeover. The Korean war where North was supported by Communist states and South was supported by US and UK. Angolan civil war held external countries help fight.

LO2: This is one of the consequences of the cold war because communist countries tried to spread communism and European countries and US wanted to stop it.;Communist Revolution in China 8.4 ,---,A civil war led by Communist Party of China and Chairman Mao Zedong to make China Communist which ended up successful.

LO4: the cause to this was the communist party started a revolution and the effect was China became a communist state.;Great Leap Forward 8.4 ,---,This was a economic and social plan put by the Communist party and Mao Zedong to make China agricultural to industrial. Caused a famine and many people to die.

LO4: this was a consequence of communist china because they placed the reform;Communist Revolution for Vietnamese Independence 8.4 ,---,The august revolution where vietnam fought against french and japan to get their independence.;Decolonization 8.5 ,---,Many colonial states colonies returned to their country because they were not welcome after independence was gained.

LO8: because of this, the economies in the decolonized countries had to be independent.;Indian National Congress 8.5 ,---,A Indian Nationalist group to have Indians to have more power in the government and to get changes to the British government.

LO6: india pursued independence by trying to get more voice in the government.;Muslim League 8.5 ,---,This organization was to separate India and Pakistan to Muslims can have their own state. Wanted muslims to have their own state.

LO6: They wanted independence by attempting to get a new country.;Partition of India 8.6 ,---,India was separated by British into 2 countries, India for Hindus and Pakistan for Muslims.

LO6: This was a way the muslims got independence and their own state.;Creation of Israel 8.6 ,---,UN voted to partition Palestine to create Israel as a home to Jews after WW2. Jews get a home country because of the holocaust.

LO6: Jews pursued independence by getting their own state.;Metropole 8.6 ,---,This is the empire who sent out people to create colonies in foreign land. A land that works for it's mother country.

L08: the economy changed after decolonization because they didn't use their economy for the mother country after it.;Mohandas Gandhi 8.7 ,---,He led a nonviolent protest for India's independence which was successful.

LO6: he used nonviolent protests to pursue independence for india.;Martin Luther King, Jr. 8.7 ,---,He was a african american civil right leader who helped bring equality to africans in America.

LO6: he used nonviolent methods to attempt to get equality.;Nelson Mandela 8.7 ,---,He was a anti apartheid in South Africa. He became the president of South Africa democratically.

L6: he used non violent methods to get equality in south africa;Francisco Franco 8.7 ,---,He led a revolution to overthrow Spanish government and then became the Dictator of Spain.

LO6: he used a war to pursue independence from spain.;Shining Path 8.7 ,---,A terrorist group to overthrow Peru's government and place in communism.

LO7: the terrorist group is not pleased with peru's government and that causes them to use force to attempt to make Peru communist.;Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan 8.8 ,---,Soviet Union sent troops to help afghanistan communism.

LO3: Soviet union used force to spread communism and US used force to stop the spread.;Cold War 8.1 ,---,A ideological battle between democracy and communism which started a series of events like more powerful nuclear weapons

LO2: The cause of this was the difference in ideology of communism and democracy, and the effect is the cold war.;Mexican Revolution 7.1 ,---,Because of Porfirio Diaz dictatorship like rule, poor treatment of workers, adn great difference in wealth between rich and poor. THis war was to end dictatorship in Mexico. (1910-1920 CE). There was foreign control over oil and railroads so they wanted to reclaim local industry.

LO 1: The internal factor of dictatorship caused a revolution to change the government of mexico;Russian Revolution 7.1 ,---,This is a revolution against the Tsarist government. This was fought to end czarist rule in Russia and create a more worker run government.

LO 1: The internal factor of the Tsarist government led to a revolution to end it and create a different government in Russia;Causes of WWI 7.2 ,---,Franz Ferdinand assassination was what started it. Imperialism of Germany and other central powers. Germany had a militarism government.

LO 1: THe causes of this was the militarism government and the consequence was staring ww1.;Total War 7.3 ,---,A war in which the limits and restrictions of war are gone and all resources are used to fight.

LO2: This was a consequence of the world war because there were few war limitations.;Great Depression 7.4 ,---,The economy crashed after the war in Europe. Germany was in great debt. This caused a crisis where everyon e did not have enough money.

Lo2: the great depression was caused by ww1 because it led to economy being unstable.;New Deal ,---,A bunch of reforms by Roosevelt to get the US out of the Great Depression

LO4: The new deal was a response to the economic crisis which they reformed the economy;Five Year Plans (Soviet Union) 7.4 ,---,Joseph Stalin made plans to change the economy of the Soviet Union and make it industrial.

LO4: this was a economic plan change by the soviet union;Fascist Corporatist Economy 7.4 ,---,the government has control over the economy. Governments would control companies.

LO4: this was another kind of economy that differed in methods from most other nations;Mandates 7.5 ,---,Mandates is the power and authority to act as a representative.

LO5: This could help territorial changes like permission for new states;Causes of WWII 7.6 ,---,World war 2 was caused by the unsustainable peace after ww1 and the imperialism in states like Germany.

LO6: the causes stated above are the causes of world war 2;New military tech WWII 7.7 ,---,There were more deadly weapons advanced causing far more casualties like the atomic bomb.

LO6: The consequences of this on ww2 was a mass increase in casualties.;Holocaust 7.8 ,---,A genocide by Hitler to kill jews. This genocide killed a great population of the jews.

LO6: This was a cause and consequence of ww2 because this was on of the nazi's purpose;Ukrainian genocide 7.8 ,---,In the soviet Union, Josef Stalin killed 4 million farmers known as kulaks

LO7: Their method of killing kulaks was by starving them to death,;
Belgian Congo 6.2 ,---,Leopold II, ruler of Belgium, went against the Berlin act and invaded Congo for it's resources.

LO 2: Belgium was different than the other Imperialist states in a way that the other countries did not break the rules placed and Belgium did.;Social Darwinism 6.1 ,---,This a theory of Natural selection and survival of the fittest. This theory was used to justify European Imperialism, racism, and etc.

LO 1: Theis theory of Natural Selection was what was used to help justify Imperialism and spreading religion;Berlin Conference 6.2 ,---,This was a meeting by European nations making rules and drawing lines of who can rule where in Africa. The European nations created political boundaries of their choosing without Africa having a say.

LO 3: The European Nations were externally controlling the state building processes in Africa

LO 2: This was different than when European nations take control by force because this was a peaceful conference in which there were no military involved when taking over another nation.;Settler colonies 6.2 ,---,European settlers make colonies in other countries so they can have the Political dominance.

LO 7: There were migration to other regions to get a European Nation to have Political control over it and then exploit for their economy;Suez Canal 6.2 ,---,This is a canal that connect Mediterranean and Red sea in egypt. Ferdinand de Lesseps negotiated it to be built, and France and British used it for 84 years.

LO 2: French and British expanded their state powers with better transportation due to the canal.;Boxer Rebellion 6.3 ,---,In the early 1900s, there was a rebellion to remove the foreigners from China. This started with the peasants but was supported by the government to remove westerners out.

LO 3: The fight to remove Westerners backfired and weakened Qing against them so Imperialist use them and change their state building process like stabilization.;Creation of Zulu Kingdom 6.3 ,---,Shaka kaSenzangakhona was the founder of the Zulu Kingdom. Zulu Kingdom was created in South Africa and they attempted to stop British rule with the Anglo-Zulu War 1879.

LO 3: The british control affected their state building process, but after losing the war, they were less stable as a state;Indian Rebellion of 1857 6.3 ,---,Indians rebelled against the East India Company (British) to gain independence from them. This rebellion removed the British rule over India.

LO 3: the external factor of British rule was removed which helped stabilize and become a stronger state politically.;Tupac Amaru II's Rebellion in Peru 6.3 ,---,In peru, because of the Spanish taxes and abuses. It began when Tupac Amaru killed the local authority. He help fight to remove Spanish from Latin America

LO 3: The spanish was an external factor who controlled Latin America parts, which affected their government and state building by making Spain profit from them.;Export Economy 6.4 ,---,An economy in which products and goods are made just to export it / trade it. There was a mass production/extraction of resources just to be sold.

LO 5: There was a increase in export economy because of the Industrial revolution and more raw materials were needed. This was one of the global affects of the Industrial Revolution;Economic Imperialism 6.5 ,---,When another nation takes over another country for it's economic benefit. A country controlled by a private business. 

LO 3: East India Company affected India's state building because they took away many of India's rights, weakening the government

LO 2: Dutch East India and East India Company both spread their rules to other nation globally

LO 4: Mother countries would get the resources needed to trade worldwide;Opium Wars 6.5 ,---,This is the war between the British and the Qing dynasty because British was selling Opium and smuggled it into the country, so CHina fought to remove British, but lost.

LO 5: British got a large stock of Opium to sell around the world but mainly to China

LO 2: Many Nation like British, Japan, France, and etc had power in Qing because they could use the Spheres of Influence.

LO 3: Foreign countries affected their state building because many states were taking away from Qing's freedom, making the government have less power.;Chinese and Indian Indentured Servitude 6.6 ,---,they were Indians and Chinese who came to US for low pay and worked on stuff like railroads.

LO 7: Because of jobs and money, Chinese and Indians traveled to America for economic reasons;Migrant workers (include Japanese and Argentinians) 6.6 ,---,Migrant workers are people who travel to other nations for jobs and to become labourers to get money. Japan had spheres of influence so they had migrant who traded with it. Also Japan traveled to US to work. British traveled to Argentina to work. Also some China went to Argentina.

LO 7: There was migration from around the world so they can get paid better;Chinese Exclusion Act 6.7 ,---,This was a US law preventing Chinese labourers from immigrating. This was to keep more Whites in America

LO : due to many Chinese Immigrants they affected society with different cultures, so US banned them from entering;Ethnic Enclave 6.7 ,---,An area with ethnic concentration with similar culture identity.

LO 8: This affected the society because the migration would leave people of the same culture in a small region;White Australia Policy 6.7 ,---,Immigration Restriction Act of 1901, which prevented any non white immigrants to going into Australia.

LO 8: Because of non white cultures in their country, they banned Immigration from non whites;Xhosa Cattle-Killing Movement 6.3 ,---,A prophet said that if all their cattle were killed, then the spirits of their ancestors would help remove the Imperialism in their country. However this backfired and caused a famine and a lot of death

LO 3: This movement weakened their state building because the famine caused the government to weaken;
Abolition movement 5.1 ,---,This was the movement to end slavery. There were new ideologies from the Enlightenment, so people started believing slavery is wrong, and attempted to end it.

LO 2: This movement was a effect of the Enlightenment, and this movement changed society by help abolitioning slavery.;Empiricism 5.1 ,---,This is a philosophy. It says that all views and concepts come from experience.

LO 1: This was one of the ideas from the Enlightenment which changed people's ideologies and justification for revolutions. This idea also help make the kind of government and ended monarchy in the Americas;Suffrage movement (include Wollstonecraft and Seneca Falls) 5.1 ,---,The suffrage movement was a movement to have equal women rights. 
Wollstonecraft was a philosopher who advocated women rights. 
Seneca Falls convention was the first woman's rights convention in US

LO 1: Many enlightenment ideas supported women's suffrage and this movement, which changed society;American Revolution (include leaders, events, and documents) 5.2 ,---,American revolution was a revolution to end Britain's rule over America. 
Some events were the Boston Tea Party and Battle of Lexington.
One of the Main leaders were Washington
The Declaration of Independence was written to start the war.

LO 3: The cause of this Revolution was the unjust rules from Britain and the effect was the colonies gained independence;Bolivar Revolutions ((include leaders, events, and documents)) 5.2 ,---,Hugo Chávez led the revolution. This was the revolution to get the Spanish out of Latin America and get indepence

LO 3: the cause of this revolution was the Spanish was unjustly using Latin Americans so the effect is they gained independence from Spanish after the war.;Classical Liberalism (include John Stuart Mill) 5.2 ,---,This is a political ideology that supports economic freedom like capitalism and also individual rights and equality.
John Stuart Mill was a philosopher that was the most influential in the Classical Liberalism.

LO 2: This was one of the ideas from the Enlightenment which was used, and this changed how people ran businesses and the societies.;French Revolution (include leaders, events, and documents) 5.2 ,---,This was a revolution in France to end monarchy and the unjust treatment towards the peasants and citizens. 
Georges-Jacques was one of the leaders.
Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen was written during this war.

LO 3: The cause was unjust treatment from the government and the effect is that the citizens got more and ensured rights;Haitian Revolution (include leaders, events, and documents) 5.2 ,---,This was the get the French rule away from Hati because the Haitians were takes as slaves. Slaves were the main soldiers. France was using slaves as labourers in Haiti, so the slaves rebelled
Jean-Jacques was a leader
This motivated the other revolutions

LO 3: The cause of this revolution was that the French would use slaves and put them in terrible conditions for France's economic benefit, and the effect of this was Haiti was free from Frances rule;Nationalism (include German, Italian, and Argentinian) 5.2 ,---,Nationalism is the support for its countries interests and even going against other countries. 
Italy- tried unification
Germany- advocate a nation state

LO 1: This idea for the nation was what caused a push for independence and many of the revolutions.;Causes of Industrialization 5.3 ,---,Growing population so more demand for goods
new inventions led to industrialization

People could make lots of money from industrializing

These are a few factors that led to Industrialization

LO 6: THe technologies from industrializing changes the economy because of the amount of production.;Factory system 5.3 ,---,Factory system is a way to make products. This was used in Industrial revolution using machinery and workers.

LO 5: This different style of production than before help create a great deal of products;Industrialization 5.3 ,---,Transforming the society and economy, by using machines and other tools to help make more products and money.

LO 6: The technology used in the industry increases 

LO 8: this changed the world by urbanization, social classes, export economy, imperialism, and etc.;Fossil Fuels Revolution ,---,This revolution started because people started using coal and oil for fuel, which impacted the industrial revolution. They found better sources for energy

LO 4: Areas with fossil fuels (environmental) were extracted and used for factories.;Industrial Communication (include Railroad, Steamship, and Telegraph) ,---,This was the ability to communicate long distances. The telegraph allowed people to talk longer distances. The railroads and steamship allowed people to meet and talk to people who live farther away.

LO 6: This could help with long range communication and travel, which invites immigrants to help labour for mass production of goods;Internal Combustion Engine ,---,This is an engine that burns fuel for energy. This ignites the fuel and uses it all within the engine to produce mechanical energy to move stuff like vehicles. 

LO 6: This helped travel at a faster pace, so the industry can constantly male products without having it's own surplus;Second Industrial Revolution ,---,This was a period of rapid increase in industrialization. New uses of steel, electricity helped increase the industrialization

LO 8: Industry economy changed the amount of products being produced, which changed the economy and that affect many other stuff like military and social classes.;Steam engine ,---,This is an engine that burns fuel and uses it's steam to power what its designed for.;Meiji Restoration ,---,This was a reformation in Japan. They industrialized Japan and ended the Tokugawa shogunate.

LO 7: The cause of this was they wanted to get a better economy so they industrialized and the effect of this was the end of the Tokugawa shogunate.;Muhammad Ali ,---,He was a general from ottoman empire who drove malmaks away from egypt. Then he became the ruler of Egypt. Since he got in charge of ruling Egypt, he became the first ruler of Egypt.

LO 7: HE ruled egypt and under his rule, he had Egypt make cotton textiles, and the effect of this was Egypt was more industrialized and grew it's economy;Capitalism (include Adam Smith) ,---,private owners and people can profit rather than the government. 
Adam Smith is the Father of Capitalism.

LO 8: THis economic system changed how many of the countries sell and trade product. For example, there is competition and private owners can sell what they want;Stock Market ,---,Buying shares of companies and selling them. Transactions of parts of companies and if the company makes money, so does the share holder.

LO 8: This economic system help normal people profit from what companies do, so it isn't just the huge companies that only profit from what they do.;Communism (must include founder) ,---,created by Karl Marx.

Everything is owned by the government to create an ideal nation.

LO 8: this economic system changed how many of the countries operated and the governments would have a huge power it the economy.;Transnational Business (include United Fruit Company and HSBC) ,---,A company that operates in multiple countries HSBC had headquarters in China but was in multiple countries. The United Fruit company was located in America but traded in Latin America for fruits like banana.

LO 7: The cause of this was the company wanted to extend out of their country to make money and the effect of this was their home country would get resources, like bananas from United fruit company;Labor Unions ,---,fighting for better wages and working conditions. There were many labour unions due to Industrialization because there were terrible working conditions.

Lo 7: The causes of this was the economic strategies of industry is low standards and the effect of the labour unions was making better workplaces;Self-Strengthening Movement ,---,After China lost the opium wars, china strengthened their military. They created a stronger army and tried to reform their economy. They attempted to industrialize.

LO7: The cause of this is the humiliating defeat in opium wars and the effect was China failed to industrialize. 

LO 3: the cause was the loss of the opium wars and the effect is that China reformed their military;Socialism (must include founder) ,---,This is a system of where the society controls the economy and the government. The people would control the production of stuff. This system would make a small differences between the social classes. This idea was created by Karl Max;Taiping Rebellion ,---,A civil war led by Hong Xiuquan. This war was to try to end the Qing dynasty and try to make the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom. The war was unsuccessful and the Qing won. This caused the death of 20 million people.

LO 3: This rebellion was caused because many wanted to take down the QIng and create a new Dynasty however the effect is that 20 million -70 million people died and the attempt was unsuccessful.;Tanzimat Reforms ,---,This was a series of reforms to change the Ottoman Empire. The ottoman Empire reformed the military so it can keep up with the westers. They also attempted to industrialize but failed.

LO 8: They tried developing a industrial economy but the effect was that the ottoman failed to industrialize;Cult of Domesticity ,---,It was an idea of the role of women should be to take care of the children and give refuge for the husband. This idea was for the women to work at the home.

LO 10: During the Industrial Revolution the roles of women changed and women worked at home;New social classes (include middle and industrial worker) ,---,There were new social classes after the industrial revolution. Officers and Managers became the middle class and the workers became the middle class.

LO 10: The industrial revolution changed the social hierarchy, putting the working class at the bottom and managers/officers in the middle class;Urbanization ,---,An increase in the amount of people living in cities. In this time period, there was more people moving to cities for jobs.

LO 7: The industrialization caused many job openings and the effect of this was people moving into the cities (urbanization);
Jewish Migrations 4.7 ,---,They traveled to the new world an colonized. THey were one of the first people to colonize and set seeds in American Colonization. 

LO 10 : they were on of the first people to colonize and their towns had huge affects on colonization of the New world.;Caravel 4.1 ,---,A ship made by the portuguese and used also by the spanish. This is a small, fast boat.

LO 2:
Made huge positive changes to the European Transportation System and allowed for Traveling,exploring, and colonizing much easier. .

LO 3:
Made transportation Faster and farther to travel, which led to faster colonization of the new world by European States.;Lateen Sail 4.1 ,---,A triangle sail to sail against winds. 

LO:
This is important for traveling in many times during the year

This promoted trade because ships can increase in size and trade more.;Nationalism 4.2 ,---,A identity with one nation and support for it and it's interests. Even go against other counties interests.

LO 2:
The European countries colonized the new world in the interests of their nation
LO 3:
The spanish mined gold in the Americas for Spain instead of helping themselves.;Bartolomeu Dias 4.2 ,---,A portuguese sailor who found a route from Europe to Asia from going around Africa.

LO 2:

European Countries traded with Asia more on water than before because ships can hold more stuff.;Prince Henry the Navigator 4.2 ,---,He is a portuguese navigator. He made a school for navigators and sent people to navigate. He was known to help Portugal's early exploration and maritime trade.

LO 3:
Portuguese had a lot more power in the Ocean trade because they controlled important areas.;Vasco de Gama 4.2 ,---,Portuguese explorer. First person to reach India from water from Europe.

LO 2:
European states started doing luxury or spice trade through Ocean rather than land with India.;Asante Kingdom 4.4 ,---,A empire in current day Ghana. They had gold feilds, and had famous craftsmanship. They participated in slave trade.

LO 6 7:
Slaves were sent to the Americas to help with agriculture. Continuities were the use of slaves but changes were in the race of the slaves.;British East India Company 4.4 ,---,A joint stock company. They had monopoly in India trade like spice trade.

LO 3:
Britain profited greatly from the Indian spices and other goods in trade;Columbian Exchange 4.3 ,---,The exchange of stuff between Europe, and Americas. The Americas traded raw goods, Europe traded manufactured goods. This was the trading system between Americas and Europe.

LO 4:
Europe and Americas were getting what they wanted and helped grow American and European economy.;Dutch East India Company 4.4 ,---,The dutch(Netherlands). THeir main purpose was for exploration. traded in between Asia and Europe, and between Asia

LO 2:
Netherlands profited from their control and taxes. THey controlled important areas and created a monopoly.;Kingdom of Kongo 4.4 ,---,This was a kingdom in Central Africa. THis was the source of Slaves for the portuguese. Portugal spread christianity here

LO 13:
Christianity spread to Africa. Old religions were being take over,

LO 7:
Source of slaves from kongo for the portuguese to use or sell.;Chattel Slavery 4.4 ,---,It is a kind of slavery. People can own people, buy, sell. Also, the children of the slaves are also owned by the owner of the parents of the slaves.

LO 7 10:
Working on the Agriculture helped keep up with the demands from EUrope and grew Americas agricultural system.;Encomienda System 4.4 ,---,The Spanish used this system in the Americas. They used Natives for labour, and in return they were paid a little and converted them to Christianity.

LO 1:
This system helped spread christianity in the new world. Spanish had labourers to help their economy and work.;Hacienda System 4.4 ,---,This was a system to make people in debt to do labour. This system tried to do what ever to make the labourers to keep working.

LO 6:
THis system kept the wealthy rich and the poor poor in the Americas.;Indentured Servitude 4.4 ,---,This is a system for people to work for someone for a set time period. In return they usually ask for a passage to the new World from Europe.

LO 6:
Poor people also migrated to the new world. Increasing amount of people colonizing in the Americas.;Mita System 4.4 ,---,This system was used by Incan and then SPanish. The Incas used this system to for men to work build as tax. The spanish used this to make Incas slaves and they worked in silver mines(harsh conditions) to keep up with Asia's and Europe's demand for silver.

LO 6:
Spanish became more wealthy because demand for silver was high. China got more supply of silver;Omani merchants 4.4 ,---,they were merchants from Oman. THey mainly did maritime trade. 

LO 5:
Oman prospered because of their Indian ocean trade. They traded with India.;Plantation Economy 4.4 ,---,Mass production of agricultural crops. They mainly use exporting cash crops for money.

LO 10:
This helped keep a good supply of food for everyone and allowed for a growing population.;Atlantic System 4.5 ,---,This is the trading system between the AMericas, Europe and Africa. Americas traded raw goods, Europe traded Manufactured goods, and africa traded spices.

LO 4 :
THrough the triangle trade, Africa, Europe, and Americas thrived economically and got what they wanted or needed.;Joint-Stock Company 4.5 ,---,This is where people can invest in a company and make a portion of the company they invested in profit.

LO 6:
Regular people could profit from investing in Joint stock Companies.;Mercantilism 4.5 ,---,This was trading for profit. This isn't the kind of trading for people to buy what they need or want, but selling stuff, to make money.

LO:
This cause a flow of goods from place to place, until goods got to many regions in the world. 

LO 1:
Religion was spread through Mercantilism and changed cultures in many areas.;Muslim-European Rivalry 4.5 ,---,Europe has many attempts to stop Islam spread. Europe uses force to prevent spread of Islam.

LO 1:
Cause millions of people to die and pushed Islam back away from Europe.;Vodun 4.5 ,---,I culture that was practiced by African descendants slaves in Haiti. Their culture was syncretised.

LO 1:
A new culture was created and these have a lot of affect on their cultural landscape.;Maratha Conflict 4.6 ,---,There were conflicts in India. THe Maratha Empire fought British in India. THey lost to the British

LO 3 :
British no longer got control of India and did not gain an wealth from in.;Maroon Societies 4.6 ,---,A societies of escaped and fugitive slaves and they formed settlements away from the slavery.

LO 1:
Slaves could survive in societies after escaping;Boyars 4.7 ,---,A noble rank in Russia, the rank below princes.

LO 10:
They were apart of a social hierarchy and they helped the prince;Casta System 4.7 ,---,The social Hierarchy used by the Spanish America. The spanish were at top and the slaves at the bottom.

LO 13:
Caused a new social hierarchy in the New world that the spanish owned;
Ming Dynasty ,---,A dynasty that ruled over China from 14th century to 17th century. they grew economically and traded during this period. 

LO 3:
This dynasty had changes and continuities with cultures from the previous dynasty after overthrowing.;Qing Dynasty ,---,China's last dynasty, which ruled from 1644 to 1912. This empire came from revolting the ming dynasty.

LO 2 1:
China grew in territory.;Mughal Empire ,---,Islamic Gunpowder Empire. THis empire ruled over current day indian and brought Islam into it.

LO 2:
This empire used weapons and military force to rula and get into power. 
LO 1:
With use of military, they expanded their territory.;Ottoman Empire ,---,Islamic Gunpowder Empire. THis empire tried to spread ISlam and controlled a lot of europe, Africa, and Middle east. 

LO 2:
This empire used weapons and military force to rula and get into power. 
LO 1:
With use of military, they expanded their territory.;Safavid Empire ,---,Islamic Gunpowder Empire. This empire took over much of the middle east and Asia. They spread ISlam and united a lot of land to the one empire. 

LO 2:
This empire used weapons and military force to rula and get into power. 
LO 1:
With use of military, they expanded their territory.;Ottoman-Safavid Conflict ,---,from 1534-1639, the empires fought to have control over Mesopotamia. 

LO 2:
They both used force and military powers to try to legitimize their rule of Mesopotamia.;Safavid-Mughal Conflict ,---,conflict between both islamic gunpowder empires. FOught in current day afghanistan. They fought over it because they wanted control over afghanistan. 

LO 2:
They both used force and military powers to try to legitimize their rule of Afghanistan. 
LO 1:
With use of military, they expanded their territory.;Tokugawa Shogunate ,---,from 1600 to 1868, a feudal military government in Japan. They kept Christianity away from Japan.

LO 2:
They used military and feudal system to be in power and kept rule.;Devshirme ,---,*Ottoman policy of taking boys from Christian peoples to be trained as Muslim soldiers*

Ottoman empire took the conquered area's kids and made them into soldiers.

LO 2:
They use military force to legitimize their rule so they got more people to join the military by recruiting.

LO 1:
With more military, they expanded their territory.;Divine Right ,---,Belief that a rulers authority comes directly from god. Rulers believed to be chosen by god, and how all power.

LO 2:
They use god as a reason to legitimize their rule;Jesuits ,---,They are members of a Roman catholic society made by Ignatius of Loyola

LO 3:
THeir beliefs of catholicism had continued in this society.;Mexica tribute list ,---,It is a tribute list that was given by the Aztecs to the Tenochtitlan it helped feed their population. IT gave goods to Tenochtitlan.

LO 1:
THis help develop and keep Tenochtitlan well because it help prevent famish.;Salaried Samurai ,---,Changed samurai purpose and paid them. THe samurai were paid to defend and help the landowners who paid them.

LO 2:
Samurai still fought and them defending Japan with fighting help legitimize their rule.;Silver Drain ,---,Because of the high demand of silver in CHina, many countries traded silver with CHina until CHina was getting majority of the silver.

LO 1:
THis helped China develop it's economy because many counties were trading with it.;Taj Mahal ,---,A building in India made by Shah Jahan for his wife. THis is a wonder of the world and is important in HIstory.

LO 3:
THe taj mahal was a ISlamic structure built in India, which is Hindu.;Zamindar ,---,Tax in Indian from mughal empire

LO 1 2:
THis empire used taxes to help develop their empire and legitimize their rule.;Renaissance ,---,A rebirth period. a period where everything became a little more modern and new technology and social changes.

LO 3:
Much of the culture in Europe had changed.;Protestant Reformat ,---,A religious movement of the 16th century that began as an attempt to reform the Roman Catholic Church and resulted in the creation of Protestant churches.

A movement to reform Roman Catholic Churches. IN this new religious,political, and etc changed and help start the modern era. 

LO 3:
Much of the culture in Europe had changed. New ideas came to be and belief system and all changed.;Sikhism ,---,A religion in india which is a blend of hinduism and islam. This religion was founded by Nanak. 

LO 3:
From ISlam and Hinduism, many people changed their beliefs to a mixture, Sikhism.;Zheng He ,---,He was a chinese explorer. He sailed across the coast of many countries in east Asia and to Africa.

LO 1:
HIs explorations had helped China develop it's knowledge of the sea.;
Srivijaya Empire ,---,*A maritime empire that controlled the Sunda strait the strait of Malacca between India and China. HS: control strengthened trade routes to China, India, and even Arabia. 
Grew wealthy by taxing trade, included parts of Java, Borneo, and Sumatra, and its capital, Palembang, became a great center of Buddhist learning* Controls strait of Malacca. Mainly Buddhism. Wealthy through trade because of Straight of Malacca. The empire was the center of expansion for Buddhism.;Mexica Empire ,---,*Aka the Aztec Empire, a large and complex Native American civilization in modern Mexico and Central America that possessed advanced mathematical, astronomical, and engineering technology. 
Also known as the Aztec Empire, a large and complex Native American civilization in modern Mexico and Central America that possessed advanced mathematical, astronomical, and engineering technology.* Mexico. In America. Colonized by Spain. Also known as the Aztec Empire. Established by Spain. It is in current day Mexico;Great Zimbabwe ,---,*City, now in ruins (in the modern African country of Zimbabwe), whose many stone structures were built between about 1250 and 1450, when it was a trading center and the capital of a large state. 
A powerful state in the African interior that apparently emerged from the growing trade in gold to the East African coast; flourished between 1250 and 1350 C.E.* A city in south africa that taxed trade from swahili cities. City failed by over using farming. Wealthy in gold and trade because of swahili city states.;Mali Empire ,---,*From 1235-1400, this was a strong empire of Western African. With its trading cities of Timbuktu and Gao, it had many mosques and universities. The Empire was ruled by two great rulers, Sundiata and Mansa Musa. Thy upheld a strong gold-salt trade. The fall of the empire was caused by the lack of strong rulers who could govern well.* Controlled a lot of trade and taxed it, making the empire wealthy.;Ethiopia ,---,*A Christian kingdom that developed in the highlands of eastern Africa under the dynasty of King Lalaibela; retained Christianity in the face of Muslim expansion elsewhere in Africa* Prevented Islam from taking over. Mainly Christianity. It used trading routes from mediterranean and Indian Ocean;Flying Cash ,---,*a paper currency of the Tang dynasty in China and can be considered the first banknote. Flying cash is a type of paper negotiable instrument used during China's Tang dynasty invented by merchants but adopted by the state. Its name came from their ability to transfer cash across vast distances without physically transporting it. It is a precursor to true banknotes which appeared during the Song dynasty.* Paper currency, China. Easy to use longer distance. One of the first paper currency used.;Caravanserai ,---,*an inn in some Eastern countries with a large courtyard that provides accommodation for caravans* A place to stop, near silk road, for merchants to stay and rest during trade travelling. This helped traders rest, and it spread bubonic plague.;Silk Roads Trade ,---,*A system of ancient caravan routes across Central Asia, along which traders carried silk and other trade goods.* Eurasia trade through land. They spread religion through Merchants and also traded. Caused more blubonic plague to spread;Samarkand ,---,a wealthy trading center known for decorated mosques and tombs. It's on the Silk Road, the ancient trade route linking China to the Mediterranean. City in Uzbekistan.;Pax Mongolica ,---,*The period of approximately 150 years of relative peace and stability created by the Mongol Empire. "Mongol peace," describes a period of relative stability in Eurasia under the Mongol Empire during the 13th and 14th centuries.* A period when the mongol empire stop fighting and conquering. It advocated trade through the Silk roads.;Effect of Mongols: Russia ,---,The Mongol conquest and occupation of eastern Slavic lands was an Asian intrusion into a Christian State and permanently affected development of the Russian State by submission to nomadic warriors.

Change this.;Effect of Mongols: Abbasid ,---,Conquest of Abbasid ended the Islamic Golden Age.;Effect of Mongols: China ,---,They brought a lot of violence and ended their dynasty system;Astrolabe ,---,*An instrument used by sailors to determine their location by observing the position of the stars and planets* A tool used to get navigate oceans;Champa Rice ,---,*Quick-maturing rice that can allow two harvests in one growing season. Originally introduced into Champa from India, it was later sent to China as a tribute gift by the Champa state (as part of the tributary system.)* Rice grown in Sout/East Asia. It is efficient;Swahili City- States ,---,*Waring states that were always competing for control of trade routes and each other. established by swahili., Many of these city-states were Muslim and very cosmopolitan. 
dominated trade along the east African coast* Controlled a lot of trade in Africa from the Indian Ocean. Because it was on the Coast, a lot of trade occured there, causing it to be a large proportion of maritime trade.;Malacca ,---,*Port city in the modern Southeast Asian country of Malaysia, founded about 1400 as a trading center on the Strait of Malacca. Also spelled Melaka. (p. 387). *Controlled straight of malacca, growing wealthy because of it.;Malay Diasporic Communities ,---,emigrant and reside and create a community a different country;Monsoon winds ,---,*The seasonal wind of the Indian Ocean and southern Asia, blowing from the southwest in summer and from the northeast in winter. (in India and nearby lands) the season during which the southwest monsoon blows, commonly marked by heavy rains; rainy season. any wind that changes directions with the seasons* Winds used it Indian Ocean trade. This helps decide what time of the year to trade and travel through the Ocean. This winds help travel time decrease, which caused more people to trade.;Indian Ocean Trade ,---,*world's richest maritime trading network that was essential for the prosperity of East Africa* 
connected to Europe, Africa, and China.; worlds richest maritime trading network and an area of rapid Muslim expansion. 
A trade network through the Indian Ocean.;Trans-Saharan Trade ,---,*route across the sahara desert. Major trade route that traded for gold and salt, created caravan routes, economic benefit for controlling dessert, camels played a huge role in the trading* Trade through the Saharan Desert. This trade went through major empires like the Mali. Mali controlled the gold through the trade, Making it one of the most wealthy empires.;Mansa Musa ,---,*Emperor of the kingdom of Mali in Africa. He made a famous pilgrimage to Mecca and established trade routes to the Middle East. Emperor of Mali Empire when it became wealthy.* He was the ruler of the Mali empire during its wealthy period. The empire controlled a lot of gold, making it a huge place to trade, and taxes made the empire wealthy because of him.;Genghis Khan ,---,*A Mongolian general and emperor of the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, known for his military leadership and great cruelty. He conquered vast portions of northern China and southwestern Asia. He conquered many areas in Eurasia.* He was the emperor of the Mongolian Empire and he led and conquered many areas in Eurasia. This conquest made the empire huge. He also help advocate trade though the silk road and protected it from bandits.;Marco Polo ,---,*Italian explorer who wrote about his travels to Central Asia and China.* Explored Asia and reason for a lot of trading with Asia.;Inca Empire ,---,*Empire in Peru. conquered by Pizarro, who began an empire for the Spanish in 1535. 
The vast and sophisticated Peruvian empire centered at the capital city of Cuzco that was at its peak from 1438 until 1532.* It was in the Americas. The Spanish came and Colonized here, creating the new empire. They had roads, walls, irrigation, and etc.;
Song Dynasty,---,*(960-1279 CE) The Chinese dynasty that placed much more emphasis on civil administration, industry, education, and arts other than military.* Confucianism was popular and Daoism and Buddhism was less popular in this Dynasty.;Grand Canal,---,*Built in 7th century during reign of Yangdi during Sui dynasty; designed to link the original centers of Chinese civilization on the north China plain with the Yangtze river basin to the south; nearly 1200 miles long.* THis helped with trade through China. This was used to move crops to other areas in China.;Neo-Confucianism,---,*A philosophy that emerged in Song-dynasty China; it revived Confucian thinking while adding in Buddhist and Daoist elements.* It is combined of social values of Song Dynasty, Confucianism, and solutions to the problems in Han and Zhao Dynasty.;Monasticism (Buddhist and Christian),---,*Living in a religious community apart from secular society and adhering to a rule stipulating chastity, obedience, and poverty. (Primary Centers of Learning in Medieval Europe)* Devoting oneself to their religion/belief. This was used in Christianity and Buddhism. THey make many changes to their life style, like living in a sperate society and obey different rules.;Mahayana Buddhism,---,*"Great Vehicle" branch of Buddhism followed in China, Japan, and Central Asia. The focus is on reverence for Buddha and for bodhisattvas, enlightened persons who have postponed nirvana to help others attain enlightenment.* A branch of Buddhism in North India with reinterpretations of human beliefs. This is one of the 3 main branches of Buddhism. Each branch has mainy of the same principles but focus on different teachings and Ideas. This branch went through China and Japan;Delhi Sultanate,---,*The first Islamic government established within India from 1206-1520. Controlled a small area of northern India and was centered in Delhi.* Islamic empire in Delhi. They were successful in stopping Mongol conquest on them . They came to be because of Military control, but also declined because of political instability.;Seljuk Empire,---,*An empire formed by Turkish and Persian Sunnis, lasting from 1037 to 1194 A.D.* A Islamic Empire in South west Asia.;Al-Andalus,---,*A Muslim-ruled region in what is now Spain, established by the Berbers in the eighth century A.D.* It is a place (now known as spain). The region occupied the Iberian peninsula.;House of Wisdom (Bayt al-Hikma),---,*An academic center for research and translation of foreign texts that was established in Baghdad in 830 C.E. by the Abbasid caliph al-Mamun.*
*The House of Wisdom, also known as the Grand Library of Baghdad, refers to either a major Abbasid public academy and intellectual center in Baghdad or to a large private library belonging to the Abbasid Caliphs during the Islamic Golden Age* It is a library for Wisdom in mainly during the ISlamic Golden age. It contained lots of knowledge from explorations and etc.;Abbasid Caliphate,---,*Descendants of the Prophet Muhammad's uncle, al-Abbas, they overthrew the Umayyad Caliphate and ruled an Islamic empire from their capital in Baghdad (founded 762) from 750 to 1258.* The chief Muslim ruler are descendants of the uncle of Muhammad.;Srivijaya Empire,---,*A maritime empire that controlled the Sunda strait the strait of Malacca between India and China. HS: control strengthened trade routes to China, India, and even Arabia* The empire helped the spread of Buddhism in8-12th century.;Mali Empire,---,*From 1235-1400, this was a strong empire of Western African. With its trading cities of Timbuktu and Gao, it had many mosques and universities. The Empire was ruled by two great rulers, Sundiata and Mansa Musa. Thy upheld a strong gold-salt trade. The fall of the empire was caused by the lack of strong rulers who could govern well.* It controls a lot of trade because people go to trade for their gold.;Mansa Musa,---,*Ruler of Mali (r.1312-1337 CE) who made a hajj to Mecca; on the way there, he spread enormous amounts of gold showing the wealth of Mali; on the way back, he brought back education and Islamic culture.* HE helped move wealth/ food from Islamic areas that are doing well to his own part of Africa. He gained access to important trade routes. He is known as the wealthiest man.;Feudalism,---,*the dominant social system in medieval Europe, in which the nobility held lands from the Crown in exchange for military service, and vassals were in turn tenants of the nobles, while the peasants (villeins or serfs) were obliged to live on their lord's land and give him homage, labor, and a share of the produce, notionally in exchange for military protection.* Feudalism is the Rank from King -> Nobles -> Knights -> Peasants. The system of how peasants and stuff work for the economy is the manorial system.;Manorial System,---,*self sufficient, economic structure that is the relationship b/w the Lord and the peasants or serfs who produced all the necessary goods to keep the manor running* It is a economic system where each part of the social class do certain stuff.;Byzantine Empire,---,*(330-1453) The eastern half of the Roman Empire, which survived after the fall of the Western Empire at the end of the 5th century C.E. Its capital was Constantinople, named after the Emperor Constantine.*The empire slowly lost land to the turks until the empire was taken over .;Serfdom,---,*A type of labor commonly used in feudal systems in which the laborers work the land in return for protection but they are bound to the land and are not allowed to leave or to peruse their a new occupation. This was common in early Medeival Europe as well as in Russia until the mid 19th century.* People give part of their freedom away to a landlord for protection and shelter.;The Crusades: Effects,---,*Economic expansion in Western Europe because trade routes are opened up, increased power of monarchs, papal supremacy grows, Christians given a wider world view, bitter legacy between Christians and Muslims
1. increased trade
2. religious hatred
3. feudal lords increased holdings from those nobility who died in the crusades
4. church, nobles, feudalism declined
5. kings became powerful
6. rise of new middle class
7. land --> money economy
8. inspired exploration for new world*
The Crusades were a series of religious wars initiated, supported, and sometimes directed by the Latin Church in the medieval period. The term refers especially to the Eastern Mediterranean campaigns in the period between 1096 and 1271 that had the objective of recovering the Holy Land from Islamic rule.*
The crusade caused 2-6 million people to die. They tried spreading Christianity and taking over Islam states. They also took over places that had different religions or no religion to convert or take over them. The spread caused territorial Expansion of Christianity.;Margery Kempe,---,*Wrote the Book of Margery Kempe - considered the 1st autobiography in the Eng. language. Chronicles her pilgrimages to holy sites in Europe and Asia. Claimed to have vision that called her to leave the vanities of the world (saw vision of Christ). Was tempted by sex and jealousy, but was devout. Acts as best insight that points to a mid. class female experience in the Middle Ages. Records the tension in late medieval England between orthodoxy and religious dissent. Was tried for illegal acts, but proved orthodoxy. Went into crying fits and many were skeptical, but eventually believed she spoke with God.* She had the earliest autobiography made in english. She traveled and wrote about her travels. She was a Christian and wrote about devotion and her relation to Jesus. She traveled to many lands like rome.;Ibn Battuta,---,*(1304-1369) Morrocan Muslim scholar, the most widely traveled individual of his time. He wrote a detailed account of his visits to Islamic lands from China to Spain and the western Sudan. His writings gave a glimpse into the world of that time period.* https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1G4hTinu8pOdinfLt5VDzZN1gLEZTLL8nBehgbNQ5nTc/edit

A traveler who went around Eurasia and documenting everything. He had documented a lot about Islamic development, fighting and defending land from Christianity, and etc.;

ENDINPUT